chore(docs): add a CMR mesh relation warning and explanation (#88)
canonical/service-mesh: docs/explanation/cross-model-mesh.md

Reviewer: Should we add a `/review-docs` slash-command to this repo? [Example](https://github.com/canonical/observability-stack/blob/main/.github/prompts/review-docs.prompt.md).

Author: thats a cool idea! Created an [issue](https://github.com/canonical/service-mesh/issues/92) for it.

# Cross-model mesh

> When two applications integrated on a charmed service mesh live in different Juju models, the Beacon charm cannot generate a correct authorization policy from a normal Juju cross-model relation alone. The `cross_model_mesh` interface (exposed as the `provide-cmr-mesh` and `require-cmr-mesh` endpoints) exists to fill that gap, and it introduces one constraint on how cross-model offers must be structured.

Reviewer: Should we introduce a positive intro statement before this paragraph? E.g.

> The Beacon charm automatically generates authorization policies based on the juju integrations that are in place at a given time. With cross-model relation that is not possible, because juju obfuscates endpoint names across models.

Reviewer 2: +1

Author: addressed

## Why a dedicated cross-model interface is needed

A service mesh authorization policy identifies the source of allowed traffic by the workload's real identity. For Istio, the principal is `cluster.local/ns/<remote-model>/sa/<remote-app>`. To build this principal, the Beacon charm in the providing model needs to know two things about the consuming application:

* the **real application name** in the remote model
* the **real model name** the remote application is deployed in

> Juju does not expose either of these across a cross-model relation. On the consumer side, an offer is consumed as a Software-as-a-Service (SAAS) under a local alias, and that local alias is the only name the providing side ever sees on the relation (`relation.app.name`). It has no relationship to the actual remote application name, and the remote model name is not surfaced at all.

Reviewer: If you feel adventurous, we could (re)start our conversation with the Juju team over a PR [adding a new field](https://github.com/juju/juju/blob/3c01f371495074c598a1646f49e409c74a5cd798/internal/worker/uniter/runner/jujuc/relation-model-get.go#L85) to the relation-model-get hook tool.

Author: Does the hook also give us the app name?

Reviewer 2: It doesn't give us the app name or model name at the moment, just the UUID. The idea is it allows an app to detect if a relation *is cross model or not* by comparing with it's own model UUID. I really doubt the Juju team will ever give us the names we need without a larger feature to manage access to the information.

Author: There seems to be an issue for [this](https://github.com/canonical/istio-beacon-k8s-operator/issues/65) so im resolving as this is not part of this PR

The `cross_model_mesh` interface works around this by carrying the real `app_name` and `juju_model_name` of the consuming application explicitly in its relation data. The Beacon charm reads this payload and uses it, instead of the local SAAS alias, to build the source principal of the generated `AuthorizationPolicy`.

## How the correlation works

> When Beacon builds policies, it iterates over each workload relation (for example `metrics-endpoint`, `reviews`, `ingress`) and, for each one, looks up the matching `cross_model_mesh` payload to discover the real source identity. The lookup key is the remote application as seen locally, that is, the local SAAS name on the relation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When Beacon builds policies, it iterates over each service-mesh relation (for example `metrics-endpoint`, `reviews`, `ingress`) and, for each one, looks up the matching `cross_model_mesh` relation to discover the real source identity. The lookup key is the remote application as seen locally, that is, the local SAAS name on the relation.
```

> This means the workload relation and the `cross_model_mesh` relation must arrive on the providing side under the **same** SAAS. Only then does the Beacon charm know that a given `cross_model_mesh` payload describes the source of a given workload relation.

Reviewer: Side comment: the PR that introduced this requirement should have been ideally marked as a breaking change (e.g. `feat(cmr)!: ...`, so that when we autogenerate the changelog it would be placed under the "breaking changes" section.

Author: I think no one was using these charms and probably all the changes were breaking at that point. But it's just a guess.

## Limitation: group cross-model endpoints into a single offer

A Juju offer produces exactly one SAAS on the consumer side, and each SAAS in a consuming model must have a unique local name. As a direct consequence:

> > All endpoints of a remote application that require an authorization policy, together with the `provide-cmr-mesh` endpoint, must be exposed through a **single** Juju offer.

Reviewer: I realize this needs to happen on the remote application, but should we add this blob to _our_ charmcraft.yaml's `.description` for that interface?

Author: What do you mean by **our charmacraft.yaml** here? In the examples in the docs? Or the in the Istio charms?

Reviewer 2: We don't have this endpoint in any of our charms. It is only for the application charms.

Author: [We actually do](https://github.com/canonical/istio-beacon-k8s-operator/blob/2c34bb455e301a1cf55dbf17207186a8bb278bdc/charmcraft.yaml#L50)

Author: Resolving, as a description should not be instructive rather should simply be descriptive.

If the workload endpoint and `provide-cmr-mesh` are exposed through separate offers, the consumer ends up with two different SAAS names backing the same remote application. The providing Beacon receives the two relations under two unrelated local names and cannot correlate them. The lookup silently falls back to the local SAAS alias as the source name, producing an `AuthorizationPolicy` whose source principal does not match any real workload. The policy is silently ineffective: cross-model traffic that should be allowed is denied (in hardened mode), or, if a permissive rule happens to match for unrelated reasons, granted under the wrong identity.

> The same applies when multiple workload endpoints on a remote application each need their own policy. They must all be grouped into the single offer that also exposes `provide-cmr-mesh`. For example:

Reviewer 2: I think it would be okay to have multiple offers as long as each one included the `provide-cmr-mesh` endpoint.

Author: Oh, good catch. I reworded it a little

```bash
juju offer my-app:reviews,metrics-endpoint,ingress,provide-cmr-mesh
```

> This is a structural limitation of Juju cross-model relations and cannot be worked around in the mesh charms or library. Future Juju support for surfacing the real remote application identity to the consumed side would remove the need for the `cross_model_mesh` interface and this grouping requirement.

Reviewer: It is totally fine to link here to a relevant issue on the juju repo, if there is one.

Reviewer 2: I don't believe anything is planned for this.

Author: I dropped it since it was speculative
